Hello, everyone, and welcome back.
In this chapter, I'll introduce you to the block architecture.
So we remember a couple of years back when I was talking about blocks and cubits I mentioned that will
come back later into checking out what's up with this data layer?
We took out the equation back then.
Well, buckle up, because the time has come.
First of all, what is an architecture?
What is it all about?
Why do we need an architecture in the first place?
Can't we just skip it?
Well, no, we can't keep it at all, because as simple and as natural as it may be, if you think a
little bit in depth, we as human species can't live without a predefined and stable architecture,
which is mainly our skeleton.
Imagine having all kinds of different classes, method's functions, variables all over the place.
This is definitely going to result in a total failure.
Now, assimilate this to us humans.
How would our life be if we only had our organs?
Everyone had to choose where to place their heart, their lungs, their kidneys, as probably none of
these people would have survived in this situation without an organized structure and a stable skeleton,
neither would have any of the apps built without the proper architecture.
It's as simple as that.
So think of the architecture as being the skeleton, the blueprint, the structure which keeps all your
code organized, stable and easy to test and maintain.
Now, look, architecture is simply an architecture which has block as its center of gravity.
So not only is block a design better and the State Management Library, but it is also an architectural
pattern.
Let's come back to a familiar image you saw a couple of years back.
What we know for now is that for every interaction and user makes with the app through its UI, there
should be an event dispatched to the specialized block or Cubitt, which will process it and will eventually
meet a state that is going to rebuild the UI in a way so that the user gets a feedback of what's going
on with the app.
The big unknown variable in all this equation is how Block processes the event and perhaps retrieves
the necessary data to show to the user.
Let me put it this way for you.
Almost every app nowadays retrieves its data from the Internet.
So in order to link our block based flutter app with the outer data layer, we need to add the data
layer into our equation so that, for example, whenever the block receives a fetchingly event from
the UI, it will request some data from the Internet, retrieve it as a response, pass it and then
return the data with a new state to the user.
We can split this into three separate main layers, which, not surprisingly, will depend one on another.
So the UI is mostly seen as a presentation layer.
Blocks this cubitt as the business logic layer and the last, but not least, the app's data as simply
the data layer.
We're going to start with the data layer, which is farthest from the user interface and work our way
up to the presentation layer.
OK, so as we discussed previously, the data layer has the responsibility of retrieving and also manipulating
data from one or more sources, whether we are talking about network request databases or other asynchronous
sources to do this.
The data layer has been split up into three important sub layers, modals, data providers and repositories.
I have set them up into this specific order because you see that they will also be dependent on one
another.
OK, so you finish some flutter tutorials and you feel confident of what you have accomplished.
You want to build your own first step.
Now you think of an idea, but then you realize that you don't know where to actually start programming
yet.
What is actually the first thing you should code?
From my experience, I believe that the best way to start your application, of course, after you visually
and technically design it, is by coding your models.
But what exactly is a model?
A model is, as its name is implying, a blueprint to the data your application will work with.
Let's pretend your application is a brand new weather app.
So the data it will be fetching from the Internet is going to be mainly weather data, right?
Well, this data needs to be stored somehow inside your application.
How can you do that inside flutter simply by creating a class for the specific data.
So in this case, we'll have a weather class right in this class.
We'll need to set up specific attributes like temperature forecast, weather icons, wind speed city
name and so on and so forth.
But how do you know which attributes your class should have?
Well, you need to be sure that these attributes will be a little bit linked and not completely pay
attention, a little bit linked to the data that will be received from the data source.
So if the data source for app will be a weather API like A..
Weather, for example, chances are that the weather data response from them will be a.
Jason Shrink telling you what, Jason is is not a part of this tutorial, nor is the definition of an
API.
But in short, a Jason is a collection of pure data like this one here, and that API stands for application
programming interface.
The API lets your product or app communicate with other products and apps without having to know how
they were implemented in the first place.
So, for example, with a subscription, we can access the Equador API weather data without having to
dive into their code implementation.
We can just take the data we're interested in and that's all.
Therefore, a model is nothing more than a class which contains the data.
The application itself will be dependent on note that it is highly recommended that your app models
should be pretty independent of the source.
As I said, they should not be completely linked.
What do I mean by this?
The models from inside the app must be kind of generic and universal to multiple data sources.
So why shouldn't they be identical to the data provided by the other API?
Well, think of what is going to happen if you have two different weather apps in your app as a source
to your weather data, their apps will set completely different Jasons to your app.
Perhaps one of them has the temperature inside a temp name field and the other one in a temperature
named field.
Then you will need to parse them separately to your universal models.
Remember that inside many apps there might be multiple data sources, but it's recommended to have only
one specific data model in which they will be passed.
This means that your model should be independent enough to get weather data from many different weather
apps.
So now, after you hopefully understood what a model is, it is time to move over to the next layer.
The data provider, the data provider's responsibility is to provide raw data to its successor, the
repository layer.
But let's concentrate on the data provider for a moment.
Data provider is actually an API for your own application.
This means that it is going to be a class which will contain different methods and these methods will
serve as a direct communication way with the data sources.
This is where all the magic happens.
This is where Flutter asks for the required data straight from the Internet.
All your network requests like HTP that get HTP, the post put delete will go inside.
Take in mind that the return type of these functions won't be of the type of model you created earlier,
but rather of the type of raw data you received from the data source, which for example, may be a
type of decent stream.
The component in which will have our modal class is instantiated as objects is the repository.
The repository is mainly a wrapper around one or more data providers.
It is safe to say that it's the part of the data layer block communicates with similar to the other
data layer subparts repositories are also classes classes which contain dependencies of the respective
data providers.
So, for example, the weather repository will have a dependency on the weather provider with the help
of which will call the JETRO weather method and retrieve the weather data.
The repository is where the modal object will be instantiated with the raw data from the data provider
or raw data, which will be passed to model data with from Jason Method's.
The repository is also a perfect place for fine tuning the data before giving it as a response to the
block.
Here you can filter it sorted and do all kinds of changes before it will be sent to the business logic
layer.
The business logic layer is where most of the blocks and cubits will be created inside your flutter
app.
Its main responsibility is to respond to the user input from the presentation layer with new omitted
states.
This layer is meant to be the mediator between the beautiful right and colorful side of the UI in the
dark, dangerous and unstable side of the data layer.
Why is one of them beautiful and shiny and the water one dark and unstable, you might ask?
Well, you are supposedly designing and programming your app to the best standards so that the UI and
the backend looks and most importantly works flawlessly.
This is the bright side.
But what about the Internet?
What about the APIs you're getting data from?
You have any guarantee that they will be as amazing and well programmed as your APIs?
Well, if the apps are not designed and programmed by yourself, definitely no errors may arise.
Bugs, crashes, server issues and so on and so forth.
Being the mediator between the bright and the dark side, the business logic layer is the last layer
that can intercept and catch any errors from within the data layer and protect the application from
crashing.
The last moment now, since this letter is closely related to the data layer, especially the repository
layer, it can depend on one or more repositories to retrieve the data needed to build up the application
state.
And we'll see how every part of the puzzle starts to get into the right place now.
Truly amazing.
Another important fact you need to know and understand is that blocks can communicate one with each
other.
You can do this too.
This is really important.
So let's say we have our previous Twitter block and we also have an Internet block which emits states
based on whether there is a stable Internet connection or not.
Supposedly your Internet connection dies when you want to know the weather from your location.
Inside the weather block, you can depend on the Internet block and subscribe to its stream of emitted
states, then react on every Internet state emitted by the Internet.
So in this case, the Internet block would have emitted a no Internet state down the stream.
The weather block will listen to the stream and will eventually receive the no internet state.
The weather blog can also emit a state in response to this Internet state, letting the user know that
there is no Internet connection.
Don't forget that a subscription to the Block needs to be closed manually by overriding the closed method.
We don't want any stream leaks inside our app.
We have arrived at our final layer of the block architecture, the presentation layer.
This layer sums up everything related to the user interface, the widgets, the user inputs, the lifecycle
events, animations and so on and so forth.
And also its responsibility in our case is to figure out how to render itself based on one or more block
states.
Most application flows will start with perhaps an abstract event, which triggers the application to
fetch some data from the data layer.
For example, when the first screen of the app will be created inside constructor, there will be another
block which adds the app started event so that some location based weather will be displayed on the
screen right away.
Here's a quick tip on how you can structure a project and folders in order to abate its architecture.
So the rule is that for every layer and even some layer I introduce today, you need to have a separate
folder inside the liberal.
So in a series complete application, you may have three folders data, business, logic and presentation.
Inside the data layer, you might have multiples of folders like models, data providers and repositories
inside of the business logic folder.
You might have blocks and two bits of folders.
And finally, inside the presentation layer, you might have multiple folders like widgets, pages,
animations and so on and so forth.
You can name these folders, whatever you want, as long as you stick to the architecture.
OK, let's proceed to the entire block architecture workflow for a basic weather application.
We currently have only one screen and a single text input inside.
Let's say, for example, that the user wants to know the current weather for Chicago.
He types in Chicago and then hits the get weather button.
Currently, everything is happening inside the presentation layer.
Now, when the user press the get weather button, a get weather event was dispatched to the weather
blog.
Whether a block knows that, first of all, it should emit a loading state to the user to let him know
that it is working on his request by displaying a loading animation on the screen.
Then inside the weather block, there is a dependency on the weather provider which can be accessed
and with the help of which the get weather for a location will be called asynchronously.
We call it asynchronously because we don't know when the data is going to come back, so we'll have
to wait for it.
Now, inside the weather repository, there is a dependency for the weather API data provider, with
the help of which will call the get raw weather for location of Chicago.
Here is where the connection with the outer dark parts of the Internet occurs.
Inside of this gets real weather for location function.
There will be an update request towards another API like AQ weather, which will receive the request
and then send back adjacent string full of requested data backed or whether API inside a data provider
layer if everything is OK.
The raw weather data, which is actually adjacent string, will be sent back to the weather repository
where it will be passed into a weather model.
Then finally, the weather model will get passed back into the block.
The block is really happy that everything went smooth and meets a new state cold weather load in which
it will send the weather model object as an attribute towards the presentation layer.
The presentation layer with the help of block builder will exit the loading state since the new.
It has been received and rebuild the UI with the new weather data marking the end of this entire workflow.
I hope you have understood how important it is to have a well-designed architecture in place ready to
organize code and skill killer application over time.
Unfortunately, having a strong architecture doesn't mean that your application will be shockproof.
Bugs and errors may arise at the slightest scale refactoring.
So it's important to have a strong testing method in order to make sure our app is as stable as possible.
That is what we're going to cover up in the next chapter of this course.
We're going to talk about block testing.
With that being said, I'm looking forward to seeing each and every one of you up next.
Stay tuned and let's get wicked.